[Music]
people in Kenya people across oceans to
go see them these people are tall they
jump high they were red and they kill
Lions you might be wondering who is
before these are they my size
you know what school I'm actually one of
them the Messiah is the boys are brought
up to be warriors the girls are brought
up to be mothers when I was five years
old I found out that I was engaged to be
married as soon as I reached puberty my
mother my grandmother my aunt is the
constantly reminded me that your husband
just passed by cool yeah
and everything I had to do from that
moment was to prepare me to be a perfect
woman at age 12 my day started at 5:00
in the morning milking the cows sweeping
the house cooking for my siblings
collecting water firewood I did
everything that I needed to do to become
a perfect wife I went to school not
because the masses women or girls were
going to school it's because my mother
was denied an education and she
constantly reminded me and my siblings
that she never wanted us to live the
life she was living why did she say that
my father worked as a policeman in the
city he came home once a year we didn't
see him for sometimes even two years
whenever he came home it was a different
case my mother worked had in the farm to
grow crops that we can eat she read the
cows and the goats so that she can care
for us but when my father came he would
sell the cows he will sell the products
we had and he went and drinked with his
friends in in the bus because my mother
was a woman she was not allowed to own
any property and by default everything
in my family anyway
belongs to my father so he had the right
and if my mother ever questioned him she
beat her a booster and really it was
difficult when I went to school I had a
dream I wanted to become a teacher
teachers looked nice they were nice
dresses high-heeled shoes I found out
later that they uncomfortable but I
admired it
but most of all the teacher was just
writing in the board not had work that's
what I thought
compared to what I was doing in the firm
so I wanted to become a teacher I worked
hard in school but when I was in eighth
grade it was a determining factor in our
tradition there's a ceremony that girls
have to undergo to become women and it's
a rite of passage to womanhood and then
I have just finished in my eighth grade
and that was a transition for me to go
to high school
this was the crossroad once I go through
this tradition I was going to become a
wife well my dream of becoming a teacher
will not come to pass so I talked I had
to come up with a plan to figure these
things out I talked to my father I did
something that most girls have never
done I told my father I will only go
through this ceremony if you let me go
back to school the reason why if I ran
away my father will have a stigma people
will be calling him the father of that
girl who didn't go through the ceremony
it was a shameful thing for him to carry
the rest of his life so he figured out
well he said okay we'll go to you'll go
to school after the ceremony I did the
ceremony happened it's a whole week long
of excitements it's a ceremony people
are enjoying and the day before the
actual ceremony happens we were dancing
having excitement and through all the
night we did not sleep the actual day
came and we walk out of the house that
we were dancing as we danced and danced
we walked out to the courtyard and there
were a bunch of people waiting they were
all in a circle and as we danced and
danced and we approached this circle of
women men women children everybody was
there there was a woman sitting in the
middle of it and this woman was waiting
to hold us it was the first there were
my sisters and a couple of other girls
and as I approached her she looked at me
and I sat down
and I sat down and I opened my legs as I
opened my leg another woman came and
this woman was carrying a knife and she
carried the knife she walked toward me
and she held my the clitoris and she cut
it off as you can imagine I bled I bled
after bleeding for a while I fainted
thereafter it's something that so many
girls I'm lucky I never died but many
died it's practice it's no anesthesia
it's a rusty old knife and it was
difficult I was lucky because one also
my mom did something that most women
don't do three days later after
everybody has left the home my mom went
and brought an ass we were taking care
of three weeks later I was healed and I
was back in high school I was so
determined to be a teacher now so that I
can make a difference in my family well
when I was in high school something
happened I met a young gentleman from
our village who had been to the
University of Oregon
this man was wearing white t-shirt jeans
karemera white sneakers and I'm talking
about white sneakers is something about
clothes I think and shoes after my
sneakers and this is in a village that
doesn't even have paved roads
it was quite attractive
I told him well I want to go to where
you are because this man looked very
happy and I had my at that and he told
me well what do you mean you wanna go
don't you have a husband waiting for you
and I told him don't worry about that
part just tell me how to get there this
gentleman he helped me while I was in
high school also my dad was sick he got
stroke and he was really really sick so
he really couldn't tell me what to do
next
but the problem is my father is not the
only father I have everybody who is my
dad's age male in the community is my
father by default my uncles all of them
and they dictate what my future is so
the news came I applied to school and I
was accepted to randolph-macon Woman's
College in Lynchburg Virginia and I
couldn't come without the support of the
village because I needed to raise money
to buy the air ticket I got a
scholarship but I needed to get myself
here but I needed the support of the
village and here again when when they
man had and the people had that I'm
woman had gotten as an opportunity to go
to school they said what a lost
opportunity this should have been given
to a boy we can't do this so I went back
and I had go back to the tradition they
believe in our among our people that
morning brings good news so I had to
come up with something to do with the
morning because there's good news in the
morning and in the village also this one
chief for an elder who has if he says
yes everybody will follow him so I went
to him very early in the morning as the
sunrise first thing is this when he
wakes opens his door his it's me my
child what are you doing here well dad I
need help can you support me to go to
America I promised him that I'll be the
best girl I will come back anything they
wanted after that I won't do it for them
he said well but I can't do it alone he
gave me a list of other 15 men that I
went 16 more men every single morning I
went to visit
they all came together the village the
women the men everybody came together to
support me to come to get an education
I arrived in America as you can imagine
what did I find
I found snow I found warmers vacuum
cleaners and lots of food in the
cafeteria I was in a land of plenty I
enjoyed myself but during that moment
while I was here I discovered alone a
lot of things I learned that that
ceremony that I went through when I was
13 years old it was called female
genital mutilation I learned that it was
against the law in Kenya I learned that
I did not have to trade part of my body
to get an education I had a right and as
we speak right now 3 million girls in
Africa are at risk of undergoing through
this
mutilation I learned that my mom had a
right to own property I learned that she
did not have to be abused because she's
a woman those things may be angry I
wanted to do something as I went back
every time I went I found that my
neighbor's girls were getting married
they were getting mutilated and here
after I graduated from here working and
worked at the UN I went back to school
to get my graduate work the constant cry
of these girls was on my face I had to
do something as I went back I started
talking to the men to the village and
and mothers and I said I want to give
back the way I had promised you that I
would come back and help you what do you
need as I speak to the women they told
me you know what we need we really need
a school for girls day because they had
not been any school for girls and the
reason they wanted the school for girls
is because when a girl is raped when
she's walking to school
the mother is blamed for that if she got
pregnant before she got married the
mother is blamed for that and she's
punished she's beaten they said we
wanted to put our girls in a safe place
as we moved and I went to talk to her
fathers the fathers of course you can
imagine what they said we want a school
for boys and I said well there are a
couple of men from my village who have
been out and they have got an education
why can't they build a school for boys
in our met build a school for girls that
made sense and they agreed and I told
them I wanted them to show me a sign of
commitment and they did they donated
land where we built the girls school we
have I want you to meet one of the girls
in that school Angeline came to apply
for the school and she did not meet any
criterias that we had she's an orphan
yes we could have taken half of that but
she was older she was 12 years old and
we're taking girls who were in fourth
grade Angeline had been moving from one
place because she's enough and she has
no mother she has no father moving from
one grandmother's house to another one
from auntie's to auntie's she had no
stabilities in her life and I looked at
her I remember that day and I saw
something beyond what I was seeing in
Angeline and yes she was older to be in
fourth grade we gave her the opportunity
to come to the class five months later
that is Angeline a transformation had
begun in her life Angelina wants to be a
pilot so that she can fly around the
world into a difference she was not the
top student with rokosz now she's the
best student not just in our school but
in the entire division that we are in
that's Sharon that's five years later
that's Evelyn five months later that is
the difference that we are making as a
new dawn is happening in my school a new
beginning is happening as we speak right
now 125 girls will never be mutilated
125 girls will not be married when
they're 12 years old
125 girls are creating and achieving
their dreams this is the thing that we
are doing giving them opportunities how
they can rise as we speak right now
women and not being beaten because of
the revolutions we've started
in our community
I want to challenge you today you're
listening to me because you are here
very optimistic you are somebody who is
so passionate you are somebody who wants
to see a better world you are somebody
who wants to see the war ends no poverty
you are somebody who wants to make a
difference you're somebody who wants to
make our tomorrow better I want to
challenge you today that be the fast
because people will follow you
be the fast people will follow you be
bold stand up be fearless be confident
move out because as you change your
world you see change your community as
we believe that we are impacting one
girl one family one village one country
at a time we are making a difference so
if you change your world you're going to
change your community you're going to
change your country and think about that
if you do that and I do that and we're
going to create a better future for our
children for your children for our
grandchildren and we will live in a very
peaceful world thank you very much
[Applause]